Add Quarkus Instrumentation Documentation (#1025)
SigNoz/signoz.io: data/docs/instrumentation/opentelemetry-quarkus.mdx

---
date: 2024-12-06
id: quarkus
title: Quarkus OpenTelemetry Instrumentation
description: Instrument your Quarkus application with OpenTelemetry and send data to SigNoz
---

import InstrumentationFAQ from '@/components/shared/instrumentation-faq.md'

> This document contains instructions on how to set up OpenTelemetry instrumentation in your Quarkus applications. OpenTelemetry, also known as OTel for short, is an open source observability framework that helps generate and collect telemetry data (traces, metrics, and logs) from your Quarkus application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document contains instructions on how to set up OpenTelemetry instrumentation in your Quarkus applications and view your application traces in SigNoz.  
```

OpenTelemetry's Java implementation integrates seamlessly with Quarkus through its extension system, providing automatic instrumentation with minimal configuration.

There are two steps to using OpenTelemetry with Quarkus:

- Instrumenting your Quarkus application with OpenTelemetry
- Validating the configuration to ensure data is being sent as expected

> <figure data-zoomable align='center'>

Reviewer: Let's remove this Figure.

    <img src="/img/docs/opentelemetry_java_instrument.webp" alt="OpenTelemetry helps to generate and collect telemetry data from your application which is then sent to an observability backend like SigNoz"/>
    <figcaption><i>OpenTelemetry helps generate and collect telemetry data from Quarkus applications which can then be sent to SigNoz for storage, visualization, and analysis.</i></figcaption>
</figure>

> After completing this guide, you will have:

Reviewer: Let's remove these pointers as well.

> After completing this guide, you will have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - A Quarkus application sending traces, metrics, and logs to SigNoz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - Real-time visibility into your application's performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - Ability to troubleshoot issues using distributed tracing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - Monitoring dashboards for your application metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Let's understand how to install and run OpenTelemetry in your Quarkus application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisite
```

> - A Quarkus REST application with basic endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Quarkus REST application with basic endpoints
```

- Java 17 or higher environment

> - Docker (if using Docker and Kubernetes)

Reviewer: Do we tell the user about Docker instructions? If not then, we should remove this as well.

Author: yes

> - OpenTelemetry extension added to your project:

Reviewer: This should not be a Prerequisite. Instead, this should be the first step under configuration steps.

These three commands should be in 3 tabs - Quarkus CLI, Maven and Gradle

```bash
# Using Quarkus CLI
quarkus extension add opentelemetry
```

```bash
# Using Maven command
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="opentelemetry"
```

```bash
# Using gradle, add the following to your build.gradle file
implementation 'io.quarkus:quarkus-opentelemetry:3.17.2'
```

## Configuration Steps

>  - Update `application.properties`

Reviewer: We should explain why the user should update this file and what these updates are doing **in brief**.

Author: added comments

> ```properties:src/main/resources/application.properties

Reviewer: We don't want the user to collect logs and metrics primarily - please update this configuration file accordingly.

# OTLP Exporter Configuration
quarkus.otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint=${OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT}
quarkus.otel.exporter.otlp.traces.endpoint=${OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT}/v1/traces
quarkus.otel.exporter.otlp.protocol=http/protobuf

# Metrics Configuration
quarkus.otel.metrics.enabled=true
quarkus.otel.exporter.otlp.metrics.endpoint=${OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT}/v1/metrics
quarkus.otel.metrics.exporter=otlp

# Logging Configuration
quarkus.otel.logs.enabled=true
quarkus.otel.exporter.otlp.logs.endpoint=${OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT}/v1/logs
quarkus.otel.logs.exporter=otlp

quarkus.log.level=INFO
quarkus.log.category."io.opentelemetry".level=INFO

# Console logging with trace context
quarkus.log.console.format=%d{HH:mm:ss} %-5p traceId=%X{traceId}, parentId=%X{parentId}, spanId=%X{spanId} [%c{2.}] (%t) %s%e%n

# File logging with trace context (optional)
quarkus.log.file.enable=true
quarkus.log.file.path=logs/application.log
quarkus.log.file.format=%d{yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss,SSS} %-5p traceId=%X{traceId}, parentId=%X{parentId}, spanId=%X{spanId} [%c{3.}] (%t) %s%e%n

# Resource Attributes
quarkus.otel.resource.attributes=${OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES}
```

<Tabs>

> <TabItem value="cloud" label="SigNoz Cloud" default>

Reviewer: Just below this tab, let's add an Info admonition saying:

<Admonition type="info">
If you haven't already, signup for [SigNoz Cloud](https://signoz.io/teams/).
</Admonition>

Quarkus Extensions and the libraries they provide, are directly instrumented, use of OpenTelemetry Agent is not required nor recommended.

Based on your application environment, you can choose the setup below to instrument your application via SigNoz Cloud.
<Tabs>
<TabItem value="vm" label="VM" default>

1. Export the OTEL Environment variables:

  ```bash
  export OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=<app-name>

>   export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS="signoz-access-token=SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS="signoz-ingestion-key=SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY"
```

We have stopped using signoz-access-token for ingestion keys

  export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=https://ingest.{region}.signoz.cloud:443
  ```

- `<app_name>` is the name for your application

> - `SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY` is the API token provided by SigNoz. You can find your ingestion key from SigNoz cloud account details sent on your email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY` is the [Ingestion Key provided by SigNoz](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/). 
```

Depending on the choice of your region for SigNoz cloud, the ingest endpoint will vary according to this table.

| Region | Endpoint |
|--------|----------|
| US | ingest.us.signoz.cloud:443 |
| IN | ingest.in.signoz.cloud:443 |
| EU | ingest.eu.signoz.cloud:443 |

> 2. Build and run your application:

Reviewer: Put the three options in this step under 3 tabs

```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="k8s" label="Kubernetes">

1. Create a docker image for your application or publish your application to a container registry:

```bash
docker build -t <app_name> .
```

2. Create a `deployment.yaml`:

```yaml:deployment.yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: quarkus-app
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: quarkus-app
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: quarkus-app
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: quarkus-app
        image: <my-app>:latest
        imagePullPolicy: Never # If you have built the image locally
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
        env:
        - name: OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
          value: "service.name=<app_name>"
        - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS
          value: "signoz-access-token=SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY"
        - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
          value: "https://ingest.{region}.signoz.cloud:443"
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: quarkus-app
spec:
  type: LoadBalancer
  ports:
  - port: 8080
    targetPort: 8080
  selector:
    app: quarkus-app
```

- `<app_name>` is the name for your application

> - `SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY` is the API token provided by SigNoz. You can find your ingestion key from SigNoz cloud account details sent on your email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY` is the [Ingestion Key provided by SigNoz](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/). 
```

Depending on the choice of your region for SigNoz cloud, the ingest endpoint will vary according to this table.

| Region | Endpoint |
|--------|----------|
| US | ingest.us.signoz.cloud:443 |
| IN | ingest.in.signoz.cloud:443 |
| EU | ingest.eu.signoz.cloud:443 |

2. Deploy to Kubernetes:

```bash
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```

You can verify the deployment by running `kubectl get pods` and checking the status of the pod.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/instrumentation/quarkus-k8s-deployment.webp" alt="Quarkus application deployed on Kubernetes"/>
    <figcaption><i>Quarkus application deployed on Kubernetes</i></figcaption>
</figure>
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

Set environment variables and run your application:

```cmd
setx OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES "service.name=<app_name>"
setx OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS "signoz-access-token=SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY"
setx OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT "https://ingest.{region}.signoz.cloud:443"
java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar
```
- `<app_name>` is the name for your application

> - `SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY` is the API token provided by SigNoz. You can find your ingestion key from SigNoz cloud account details sent on your email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY` is the [Ingestion Key provided by SigNoz](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/). 
```

## Validating Instrumentation

To verify your instrumentation is working:

1. Trigger an action in your app that generates a web request. Hit the endpoint a number of times to generate some data. Then, wait for some time. Ex:
```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/hello
```
<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/instrumentation/quarkus-k8s-deployment.webp" alt="Quarkus application deployed on Kubernetes"/>
    <figcaption><i>Triggering an action in your app that generates a web request</i></figcaption>
</figure>

2. Check the Services tab in SigNoz UI for your application
<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/instrumentation/quarkus-services-in-signoz.webp" alt="Services tab in SigNoz UI"/>
    <figcaption><i>Services tab in SigNoz UI</i></figcaption>
</figure>

3. Navigate to the Traces tab to see detailed traces

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/instrumentation/quarkus-traces-in-signoz.webp" alt="Traces from a Quarkus application in SigNoz UI"/>
    <figcaption><i>Traces from your Quarkus application visible in SigNoz UI</i></figcaption>
</figure>

> 4. Check logs in the Logs tab

Reviewer: Let's remove this image since logs are in an experimental state.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/instrumentation/quarkus-logs-in-signoz.webp" alt="Logs from a Quarkus application in SigNoz UI"/>
    <figcaption><i>Logs from your Quarkus application visible in SigNoz UI</i></figcaption>
</figure>

## Troubleshooting

If traces are not appearing:
- Verify your configuration in `application.properties`
- Check application logs for OpenTelemetry-related errors
- Try enabling debug logging by setting `quarkus.log.category."io.opentelemetry".level=DEBUG`

> - Ensure your application can reach the SigNoz endpoint

Reviewer: How do user ensure this ?

Author: added steps to check for logs.

> ## Sample Application

Reviewer: Lets move the Sample Application section above the Troubleshooting section
